Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and Bill Vernon. Elsbreg de Camp's career as a writer of
science fiction and fantasy is in its fifth decade. He started back in the late
1930s in the pulp magazines and has written continuously ever since. His
collaborations with Fletcher Pratt occupy an important place in the body of his
work. Among others, these would include the Harold Shea stories, The Incomplete
Enchanter, The Castle of Iron, and Wall of Serpents. Another of his better known
books is Less Darkness Fall, an account of a modern man who ends up in 6th
century Rome trying to keep civilization alive as barbarism sweeps Europe. In
recent years, De Camp has gotten involved in the Conan stories of Robert E.
Howard and has written some rousing sword and sorcery. We asked De Camp to
recall for us his beginnings as a writer. Well, in 1937 and 8, I was working in
Scranton, Pennsylvania as principal of the School of Inventing and Patenting of
the International Correspondents. And I had a friend in New York, an old college
roommate of mine named John Clark, who was out of a job and looking for a lot of
stuff. And in order to continue to eat, he, who was a faithful reader of the
science fiction magazine that I was in that time, wrote a couple of stories. And
I used to come in, oh, once or twice a month to New York, and I'd stay at his
apartment and sit up late and plot a couple of these stories. So I gave him some
help with them. He sent them to Andrew Cremaine and the editor of Astounding,
and he sold them. So I thought, why can't I? So, having spent his time in
Scranton, I wrote a couple and sent them in. To my surprise, they were lost. He
continued to sell an occasional story to the pulp magazines while working at his
regular pulp magazines. But then something happened to change him into a full
-time writer. At the end of 1939,
he was working as one of the editors on a trade journal in New York. And I got
fired in an economy purge. So instead of sitting around with a fiddling
editorial job, I would have a free list. I think that if I spent five hours a
week on my own time writing and made a certain amount of money, if I could spend
50 hours a week at it, make 10 to 15 a month. Well, of course, there's a
fallacy. It's gone into a law of diminishing return. But nevertheless, I took
the plunge and found that in freelancing, I earned about as much as I had been
doing. And I could be my own, work at my own pace, work sitting down, and work
out all my old clothes. So, except for a couple of temporary jobs, I was a
second worker of war in which I was in the Naval Reserve. I've been at it for
since. De Camp is a professional writer in the truest sense of the word. He
writes almost books on engineering to the definitive history of the Scopes
trial, biography of Charles Darwin for juveniles. Of course, remember that
although people generally refer to me as a science fiction writer, the reason is
mainly that I made my early reputation in that field. Actually, fiction is only
about half of my output, the rest being science, history, biography, literary
journalism, and so on. And of the fictional half, aside from five historical
novels that I've written, about half is science fiction in the strict sense and
half is fantasy. So only about a quarter of my output is really science fiction
in the strict sense. More on L. Sprague de Camp next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Women, especially when you watch these reports there are images of biological
learnings of the pre-meditization was they're encouraged to have this community
to have other ideas and computers to have black aliens, but apparently we've got
reduced ros't predricians with art titles in the same расPPOS taken along for
the quality of the research. But this之前 stayed a place,
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show. Stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane. Humor is not common in science fiction and
fantasy. That's understandable. Traditionally, science fiction is concerned with
spaceships, aliens, high adventure. So much adventure and excitement that humor
would seem out of place. But noted science fiction and fantasy author L. Sprague
de Cam thinks that humor and science fiction can mix very well. Well, all I can
say is that it is true that there aren't a great many humorous stories in that
field. But then, of course, there aren't a great many humorous stories in any
genre of fiction. Some people do it and some people don't. Now, back in before
the Second World War, pardon me, I'm not that old quite yet. But before the
Second World War, of the active science fiction writers in the country, there
were only two who were considered humorous science fiction writers. And I was
one and Henry Kuttner was the other. Curiously enough, both Henry and I, in our
private lives, were rather serious, solemn fellows. Much of De Camp's science
fiction and fantasy is humorous. In one of the Harold Shea stories, collected in
The Incomplete Enchanter, De Camp delights in constructing episodes that show
the incongruity of a 20th century man trying to survive in the world of
Spencer's Fairy Queen. There's some funny stuff in there. At one point, Shea and
his companions are captured by the blatant beast, who threatens to devour them
if they don't entertain him by resetting an epic. But all the epic Shea starts
to recite, such as Beowulf, the blatant beast already knows. In desperation,
Shea launches into the Ballad of Eskimo Nell, a bawdy drinking song that goes on
forever. In the first place, Shea is mortified by having to recite such a thing
in front of his female companion. But the blatant beast lets his captives go and
walks off slowly into the woods, shaking its monstrous head. It's ridiculously
incongruous, of course. And De Camp maintains that's where the humor comes from.
One of the basic elements of humor, in my estimation, is the element of surprise
or incongruity. In other words, a derby hat on a London businessman is not funny
because they all wear them. But a derby hat on Julius Caesar is, you see,
because it's incongruous. And that is a very considerable factor in humor. We
asked De Camp if there was anything that wouldn't mix well with humor. Maybe
heroic sword and sorcery material like the Conan stories. Well, you couldn't get
the same effect that Robert Howard did with his Conan because in Robert Howard's
original Conan stories, there is hardly any humor. Only in a couple of stories
is there a faint gleam of it here and there. And when I collaborate with present
-day Conan stories, with, let us say, Carter, why, he has to call me down now
and then because I just have a natural tendency to stick a little humor in now
and then. I've been doing it so long, it comes natural. But it should not be
done because it spoils the general effect. Now, as for my own stories in that
genre, well, I have no hesitation about putting humor in and putting humor in.
And my heroes are, in general, not supermen. They have to be pretty able
fellows, but I try to make them realistic. That is, with the usual assortment of
virtues and vices and strengths and weaknesses. Because that's the kind of
character that I personally find it easier to believe in when I read it. Humor
takes many forms in DeCamp's work. He can use gentle satire, for instance, in a
book like The Great Fetish. And don't forget his collection of humorous barroom
tall tales done with Fletcher Pratt, tales from Gavegan's Bar. We're seeing more
humor in science fiction today. I suspect L. Sprague DeCamp's influence is being
felt. More next time on L. Sprague DeCamp.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
The Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, of the
Permian Basin Science Fiction Association. Coming up next is the Science Fiction
Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And Bill Vernon. One of the most successful collaborations
in the field of science fantasy was the team of Fletcher Pratt and L. Sprague
DeCamp. During the late 30s and through the 40s, they wrote a series of humorous
stories about a young man named Harold Shea. Shea theorizes that there are an
infinite number of worlds that exist all around us. And he finds a way to get to
them using symbolic logic. He visits a number of fantastic places. The world of
Norse mythology, for instance, and the world of Spencer's Fairy Queen. Sprague
DeCamp says that a friend named John Clark introduced him to Fletcher Pratt in
the late 1930s. Fletcher was at that time an established and active writer and I
was a struggling young pro, you might say. So, John said to me, hey, Fletcher
says he would like to see you. He has an idea for some stories. So, I went
around to Fletcher's and he proposed that he and I collaborate on a series of
stories based upon this far-out theory that you can slip into any universe you
want to by manipulating the symbols of symbolic logic. I had been studying
symbolic logic a little with all its cuter symbols and things. So, okay, we went
to it. And that is how the five Harold Shea stories originated. The Shea stories
appeared in pulp magazines beginning in 1940. They were later collected in three
books. The Incomplete Enchanter, The Castle of Iron, and Wall of Serpents. The
alternate universes Shea enters are fantasy worlds where magic works. But
they're all consistent logical places once you accept their magical framework.
Right. Shea finds out that matches or guns just don't operate in these worlds.
The Camp says that such consistency is important to fantasy. Both Fletcher and I
had long since agreed that, right from the start, that the most effective, that
in writing fantasy, you have to be even more careful about internal consistency
than you do in writing a realistic story. Because the reader's credulity is
already stretched like a rubber band, you see. And if you put extra strain on it
by having some obvious contradiction, it's going to snap. At that point, you'll
probably stop reading. The Camp explains how he and Pratt came up with their
alternate worlds. Actually, I've always been a very heavy reader. I was reading
Darwin's Origin of Species through at the age of seven, you know, and things
like that. And I had a pretty good historical and mythological knowledge. But
actually, for the roaring trumpet, Fletcher knew a good deal more about that
than I, because he was an enthusiast for the northern thing, as William Morris
called it. And it belonged to a group that got together in Boston and read
Icelandic sagas to each other in the original. Well, therefore, he was way ahead
of me in the matter of Norse mythology. Then the second story was laid in the
world of Spencer's Fairy Queen. And I had never read the Fairy Queen, so I sat
down and dutifully plowed right through it. I never did have quite the
enthusiasm for it that Fletcher did. I found it pretty tedious for long
stretches. But nevertheless, he thought highly of it, and he went through it.
And then for the third one, why I knew something about Ariosto's Orlando
Furioso, although I'd never read it through, but it wasn't very difficult to get
hold of a set and read it. And that furnished the material there. Well, then we,
after the Second World War, we sent Harold to the world of the Finnish
Kallivala. And that was simply a matter of getting the Everyman's Library
edition and reading through that and taking notes. And we finally had him end up
where he'd wanted to go all along, which is in the mythological Ireland of
Coochollan and Queen Maeve. And I already knew a fair amount about that, but I
read up some more, and so we got the stories. Next time, we'll have more on
Elsberg de Camp.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,